Investigative interviewing
This page is from APP, the official source of professional practice for policing.

Professionalism and integrity
Interviewing is complex. It requires learning and practice to ensure that high standards are
achieved and maintained.
An interview may not be used solely for obtaining information about an investigation. It may also be
used to provide witnesses and victims with important information, for example, about court
proceedings, protection of identity, special measures, disclosure, intermediaries and witness
protection.
In any interview it is essential that the investigator acts with professionalism and integrity. The
following will support this.
Establishing a professional relationship
People are more likely to give accurate information if they trust the professionalism of the
interviewer. The interviewee should be treated fairly and in accordance with legislative guidelines.
Interviewers must not allow their personal opinions or beliefs to affect the way in which they deal
with witnesses, victims or suspects.
The importance of being methodical
Being methodical helps both the interviewer and interviewee. Planning, preparation and ensuring
that the interview plan is followed, and that answers are linked are all part of being methodical. The
PEACE interview model also helps.
Personal style30/03/2026 Investigative interviewing

Style matters because it affects the motivation of the interviewee to be accurate and relevant in
their replies. Establishing a rapport means being genuinely open, interested and approachable, as
well as being interested in the interviewee’s feelings or welfare.
Interview location
The physical setting can have an effect on the establishment of the relationship between those
involved. The interviewer should consider the impact the location can have on themselves and the
interviewee, in particular the affect the formality of designated interview rooms can have on some
witnesses and victims.
Dealing with suggestibility
This is when an interviewee is influenced by what they believe the interviewer wants or expects
them to say. People vary in the degree to which they are suggestible. Vulnerable people, people
with learning difficulties and children, for example, may be more suggestible and require special
protection.
Principles and ethics
The national strategic steering group  on investigative interviewing and the  professionalising
investigation programme  support a quality approach to interviewing suspects, victims and
witnesses. This, in turn, generates a number of  benefits.
The aim of all professional interviewers is to obtain a full and accurate account. To do this they
must ask the right questions.
The chances of obtaining a high-quality account are increased by the application of good
investigative interviewing techniques, underpinned by seven key principles.
These are designed to guide investigators on how to use the  PEACE framework  for investigative
interviewing, for interviewing in operational situations. They also help the investigator to comply
with the legal issues , and when  working with legal advisers .
Benefits30/03/2026 Investigative interviewing

The following benefits have been defined by the professional structure for investigative
interviewing:
Public confidence – Professional interviews will provide high-quality material that enables the guilty
to be brought to justice and the innocent to be exonerated. This increases public confidence in the
police service, particularly with victims and witnesses of crime.
Consistent performance – Criminal investigation largely takes place away from the police station.
Interviews with victims and witnesses are conducted at scenes of crime, at witnesses’ homes, at
their place of work, in cars and in the street. The techniques of investigative interviewing will help
investigators to achieve results in even the most unpromising circumstances.
Support for victims and witnesses – Victims and witnesses may be upset, scared, embarrassed or
suspicious. Good investigative interview techniques will help to calm or reassure them so that they
can provide an accurate account.
Dealing with suspects – Interviews generally take place in a police station, but can be elsewhere,
for example, a prison. Do not assume that all suspects are going to lie, say nothing or provide a
self-serving version of events. Some may, but where suspects do admit guilt this will be due, in
part, to the strength of material gathered during the investigation.
Principle 1
The aim of investigative interviewing is to obtain accurate and reliable accounts from victims,
witnesses or suspects about matters under police investigation.
To be accurate, information should be as complete as possible without any omissions or distortion.
To be reliable, the information must have been given truthfully and be able to withstand further
scrutiny, for example, in court.30/03/2026 Investigative interviewing

Accurate and reliable accounts ensure that the investigation can be taken further by opening up
other lines of enquiry and acting as a basis for questioning others.
Principle 2
Investigators must act fairly when questioning victims, witnesses or suspects. They must ensure
that they comply with all the provisions and duties under the  Equality Act 2010  and the Human
Rights Act 1998 .
Acting fairly means that the investigator must not approach any interview with prejudice. The
interviewer should be prepared to believe the account that they are being given, but use common
sense and judgement rather than personal beliefs to assess the accuracy of what is being said.
People with clear or perceived vulnerabilities should be treated with particular care, and extra
safeguards should be put in place.

Working with victims and witnesses
MOJ (2022) Achieving Best Evidence in Criminal Proceedings: Guidance on Interviewing
Victims and Witnesses, and using Special Measures
Principle 3
Investigative interviewing should be approached with an investigative mindset.
Accounts obtained from the person who is being interviewed should always be tested against what
the interviewer already knows or what can be reasonably established.
The main purpose of obtaining information in an interview is to further the enquiry by establishing
facts. This point highlights the importance of effective planning in line with the whole investigation.
Interviewers should think about what they want to achieve by interviewing the victim, witness or
suspect, and set objectives which will help to corroborate or disprove information already known.
Investigators should try to fill the gaps in the investigation by testing and corroborating the
information by other means where possible.30/03/2026 Investigative interviewing

Principle 4
Investigators are free to ask a wide range of questions in an interview in order to obtain material
which may assist an investigation and provide sufficient evidence or information.
Conducting an investigative interview is not the same as proving an argument in court. This means
that interviewers are not bound by the same rules of evidence that lawyers must abide by.
Although the interviewer may ask a wide range of questions, the interviewing style must not be
unfair or oppressive. The interviewer should act in accordance with the  Police and Criminal
Evidence Act 1984  (PACE) and the PACE codes of practice. See  principle 2  for further
information regarding equality and human rights considerations.
In R v Fulling [1987]  2 All E.R. 65, Lord Chief Justice Taylor stated that oppression is defined as:
the exercise of authority or power in a burdensome, harsh, or wrongful manner, or unjust or cruel
treatment of subjects or inferiors, or the imposition of unreasonable or unjust burdens in
circumstances which would almost always entail some impropriety on the part of the [interviewer].
Principle 5
Investigators should recognise the positive impact of an early admission in the context of the
criminal justice system.
Benefits of an early admission relate to the following areas:
Victim – has an opportunity to claim  compensation  in respect of an offence that has been admitted
by the defendant, detected, and acknowledged by the criminal justice system.30/03/2026 Investigative interviewing

Court – has a fuller and more accurate picture of the offending and is able to sentence more
appropriately. There is the potential for savings too as offences can be dealt with promptly without
additional court hearings.
Defendant – may receive credit for early admission of guilt. They may be eligible for a lesser
sentence – possibly allowing for tailored sentencing and access to rehabilitative programmes, and
being able to ‘clear the slate’ to avoid the risk of subsequent prosecution for other offences. See 
CPS guidance  and Sentencing Council Guidelines (2007) Reduction in Sentence for a Guilty
Plea.
Police – gain valuable intelligence, increase detected offences rates, record a fuller picture of
offending for possible use in future cases or to support applications for anti-social behaviour orders,
or other restrictive orders.
Prosecution – has a fuller and more accurate picture of, for example, the offender’s criminal history
when considering the public interest test, bail decisions, bad character, level of danger, and what
information to give the court.
Resources – are used efficiently, and the public’s confidence in the criminal justice system is
improved.
Principle 6
Investigators are not bound to accept the first answer given. Questioning is not unfair merely
because it is persistent.
An investigating officer has the duty to obtain accurate and reliable information. A complete and
reliable account from witnesses, victims and suspects may not always be easy to obtain.
There may be different reasons why an investigator needs to be persistent:
they may have reasonable belief that the interviewee is not telling the truth
they may believe further information could be provided
It is acceptable for interviewers to be persistent as long as they are also careful and consistent but
not unfair or oppressive. See  PACE Code C paragraph 10.9 and paragraph 11.5  for clarification.30/03/2026 Investigative interviewing

Principle 7
Even when a suspect exercises the right to silence, investigators have a responsibility to put
questions to them.
This principle extends the right of an investigator to put questions to those they believe can help
them to establish the truth of a matter under investigation.
Suspects have the right to remain silent, but they are warned during the police caution or during
special cautions of possible adverse inferences being drawn should they choose to exercise that
right. These may be in terms of failure or refusal to account for objects, substances or marks (
Criminal Justice and Public Order Act 1994 (CJPOA) section 36 ) or failure or refusal to account
for presence at a particular place ( CJPOA section 37 ).

National strategic steering group
The national strategic steering group on investigative interviewing (NSSGII) oversees the
development and delivery of the most effective interview strategy. Its role is to ensure that the
police service adopts a consistent and professional approach, which is able to withstand judicial
and academic scrutiny and instil public confidence.
The overall aim of the NSSGII is to provide direction on the development of policy, practices and
procedures to ensure that the interviewing of victims, witnesses and suspects supports professional
investigation.
The NSSGII has clearly defined terms of reference.
The following advice can be accessed through the NSSGII support network.
National interview coordinator – who is able to provide a wide range of advice in relation to
operational, training and policy issues.
ACPO approved interview advisers – who provide assistance to the national interview coordinator.
Force interviewing champion – each force should have nominated a champion for investigative
interviewing who promotes interviewing as a core police service competency. The interviewing
champion is responsible for overseeing the ongoing implementation and maintenance of the30/03/2026 Investigative interviewing

national investigative interviewing strategy in their force, which involves identifying innovations,
supporting best practice and disseminating information.
Regional coordinator – each region has appointed a coordinator for investigative interviewing. The
regional coordinator for investigative interviewing supports the force interviewing champions within
their region by promoting the national investigative interviewing strategy and disseminating good
practice.
PEACE framework
PEACE model
There are five phases to the PEACE framework.
Planning and preparation
This is one of the most important phases in effective interviewing. The success of the interview and,
consequently, the investigation could depend on it.
A planning session that takes account of all the available information and identifies the key issues
and objectives is required, even where it is essential that an early interview takes place.30/03/2026 Investigative interviewing

Interviewers should consider the following:
create and record the interview plan
characteristics of the interviewee
practical arrangements
making a written interview plan
Interview plan
Planning and preparation gives the interviewer the opportunity to:
review the investigation
establish what material is already available
decide on what the aims and objectives of the interview are
Every interview must be prepared with the needs of the investigation in mind. How the material is
obtained during interview helps to establish the accuracy of the matter under investigation and
should be considered carefully.
The following questions may be helpful at this stage.
Who needs to be interviewed and in what order?
Why is a particular interviewee’s viewpoint so important?
What information should now be obtained?
Should the suspect or witness be interviewed immediately, or would it be more useful to wait until
more information has been obtained about the circumstances of the offence from other sources?
Interviewee
Individual characteristics should be taken into account when planning and preparing for an
interview. Although not an exhaustive list, these may include:
age – knowing the interviewee’s age helps to determine the best time to undertake the interview
and whether an appropriate adult/interview supporter is required
cultural background – this can affect the way a person prefers to be addressed, and may also
indicate the need for an interpreter
religion or belief – for example, interviewers may need to take prayer requirements into account30/03/2026 Investigative interviewing

domestic circumstances – this can help to identify other people who may be useful to the
investigation, for example, family, associates or neighbours
physical and mental health – knowledge of an existing medical condition and ensuring that
appropriate facilities are used
disability
previous contact with the police – this helps to determine factors such as the interviewee’s
reaction, and the interviewer’s safety
gender – in certain types of crime, for example, sexual offences or domestic violence, it is
important to consider the gender of the interviewee. Potentially sensitive issues such as an
interviewee’s sexual orientation or gender assignment should be approached tactfully, if these
matters become relevant to the interview
For further information on working with interpreters see:
College of Policing (2024) Briefing Note: Using Language Services
College of Policing (2020) Interpreting, Working with an Interpreter: Aide memoire for
Interpreter assisted interviews
College of Policing (2020) Interpreting, Briefing the Interviewee: Aide memoire for
Interpreter assisted interviews
Practical arrangements
The interviewer may need to consider a number of activities and practical considerations which may
help them to understand the circumstances of the offence, and to achieve the best interview from
the interviewee.
These include:
visiting the scene
searching relevant premises
location of the interview
role of interviewers
timings
equipment
exhibits and property
knowledge of the offence30/03/2026 Investigative interviewing

Written interview plan
The interview plan summarises the aim(s) of an interview and provides framework for questioning.
It can increase the confidence of the interviewer and provide the flexibility to conduct a professional
and effective interview. A written interview plan should be used for key witnesses, as well as
suspects.
It should include:
the time a suspect has been in custody (investigators should be aware of the  detention clock
 and its impact on the interview)
the range of topics to be covered around identified time parameters (this may vary depending
on whether it is a witness or suspect interview)
the points necessary to prove the potential offence(s) under investigation
any points which may be a defence for committing the offence(s) under investigation
introduction of exhibits
material which suggests the suspect may have committed the offence
identified information which may assist the investigation
any other relevant points, for example, actus reus (guilty act), mens rea (guilty mind), intention,
no valid defence
planning for a prepared statement, special warnings, adverse inference, significant comments or
silences
Multiple interviewers
The plan should record who will be the lead interviewer, and who is responsible for taking notes. It
is important that interviewers understand their respective roles and maintain the role agreed. Two
interviewers asking multiple questions in an unstructured manner is unlikely to achieve the
interview’s objective.
Engage and explain
The first step to encouraging conversation is to engage the interviewee. This is not always easy,
especially if the person is previously unknown to the police.30/03/2026 Investigative interviewing

Active listening assists the interviewer to establish and maintain a rapport. This then enables them
to:
identify topics during the interview and, therefore, manage the conversation
communicate interest to the interviewee in their account
identify important evidential information
Factors such as the interviewee’s background and personal  characteristics  should be taken into
account.
Beginning the interview
This is important and should be considered in the planning stage. The reason for the interview
should also be clearly explained, eg, the interviewer may say:
‘You are here because you have been arrested for (offence)’ or
‘You are here because you witnessed (offence/incident).’
The interviewer should then check the interviewee has understood the explanation.
Objectives of the interview
Before starting an interview, the objectives of the interview should be explained to the interviewee,
and they should be provided with an outline or route map of it.
For example, interviewers may say:
‘During this interview I will talk to you about (list objectives).’
Then go on to explain:
‘I will also ask you about anything else which may become relevant during the interview in order to
properly establish the facts and issues.’
Routines and expectations
It is good practice to explain to the interviewee that if they nod or shake their head the interviewer
will state that they have done so. It should also be explained that notes will be taken during the
interview.30/03/2026 Investigative interviewing

It may be useful to inform the interviewee that although the police wish to establish certain facts
and issues, it is the interviewee’s opportunity to explain their involvement or non-involvement in the
incident under investigation.
Investigators should encourage the interviewee to voice anything which they feel is relevant,
explaining that there is no time limit for the interview and that as much detail as possible is
required, encouraging the interviewee to voice anything which they feel is relevant.
The interviewee should be reassured that they will not be interrupted. It may be appropriate to ask
the interviewee to consider fully any question they are being asked before they answer.
Account, clarification, challenge
Obtaining an account consists of both initiating and supporting. In volume and priority crime
investigations the most common way of initiating an account is simply to use an open-ended
prompt, such as, ‘tell me what happened’.
Support an account with active listening
This includes:
non-verbal behaviour such as adopting an appropriate posture and orientation towards
the interviewee
allowing the interviewee to pause so that they can search their memory, without interrupting
encouraging the interviewee to continue reporting their account until it is complete by using simple
utterances such as ‘mm mm’ and prompts, for example, ‘What happened next?’ or questions that
reflect what the interviewee has said, such as, ‘He hit you?’.
Clarify and expand the interviewee’s account by:
breaking the account down into manageable topics
systematically probing those topics by means of open-ended and specific-closed questions until
as full a picture as possible of the interviewee’s account has been obtained
examining any information, identified during the planning phase, that has not already been
covered

Questions
These should be as short and simple as possible. They should not contain jargon or other language
which the interviewee may not understand.
Some types of questions are useful, helping the interviewer to extract information from the
interviewee, for example, open-ended. Others are not and may actually confuse the interviewee or
prevent them from giving a full and accurate account, for example, multiple questions.
Five key question types:
open-ended
specific-closed
forced-choice
multiple
leading
Open-ended
For example, ‘Tell me’, ‘Describe’, ‘Explain’.
are useful at the beginning of an interview as they allow for a full, unrestricted account
produce answers which are less likely to have been influenced by the interviewer
The interviewer should avoid interrupting the interviewee when asking open questions.
Specific-closed
For example, ‘Who did that?’ ‘What did he say?’ ‘Where does he live?’ ’When did this happen?’
This type of question:
gives the interviewer with more control
can be used to elicit information that an interviewee has not yet provided in response to open-
ended questions
may be used to clarify and extend an account that has been elicited through open-
ended questions, cover information important to the investigation that an interviewee has not
already been mentioned, or to challenge
may have the potential disadvantage of restricting an interviewee’s account30/03/2026 Investigative interviewing

Forced-choice
For example, ‘Was the car an estate or a saloon?’ In this situation:
interviewees might guess the answer by selecting one of the options given
interviewees might simply say ‘yes’ in response to the question, leaving the interviewer to
guess which part of the question the response applies to, or needing to ask a follow-up question
to clarify it
the choice of answer given to the interviewee might not contain the correct information, for
example, ‘was it dark blue or light blue?’, when it could have been medium blue
Multiple
For example, ‘Where did he come from, what did he look like and where did he go to?’ These
questions may also refer to multiple concepts, for example, ’What did they look like’ and confusion
might arise as a result of the:
interviewee not knowing which part of the question to answer
the interviewer not knowing which part of the question the answer refers to
Leading
For example, ‘You saw the gun, didn’t you?’ implies the answer or assumes facts that are likely to
be disputed. They can also:
be used to introduce information not already mentioned, for example, ‘What did  he look like?’
have an adverse influence on interviewee’s response
distort the interviewee’s memory
The information obtained as a result of leading questions may be less credible and in extreme
cases could be ruled inadmissible. They should, therefore, be used only as a last resort.
Closure
This should be planned and structured so that the interview does not end abruptly.
Where there are two interviewers, the lead interviewer should check that the second interviewer
has no further questions before closing the interview.30/03/2026 Investigative interviewing

The interviewer should accurately summarise what the interviewee has said, taking account of any
clarification that the interviewee wishes to make.
Any questions the interviewee asks should be dealt with.
The interviewer should then bring the interview to a conclusion by preparing a witness statement if
appropriate or, where the interviewee is a suspect, by announcing the date and time before turning
the recording equipment off.
They should then explain to the interviewee what will happen next.
Evaluation
Following an interview, the interviewer needs to evaluate what has been said with a view to:
determining whether any further action is necessary
determining how the interviewee’s account fits in with the rest of the investigation
reflecting on the interviewer’s performance
Witness considerations
Victims are also witnesses. The skills needed to interview witnesses are just as important as those
needed to deal appropriately with suspects. It is important that as much information as possible is
gathered from the witness and recorded in witness statements. Completing a crime report is an
opportunity to record information about the crime, including accurate and reliable information
obtained from witnesses.
Interviewers must treat all witnesses with sensitivity, impartiality and respect for their culture and
rights, while maintaining an investigative approach.
The interviewee may be suffering from shock or trauma as a result of the incident and be in need of
support. The police can help by making appropriate referrals to other agencies and by supplying
contact information. Any referrals should be made with the consent of the witness. See  working
with victims and witnesses .
It is important to consider how a witness interview may be structured to obtain the best possible
information.30/03/2026 Investigative interviewing

Interviews should be conducted as soon as possible after the incident, in a quiet place, with
minimum distraction and maximum privacy (for example, a car or quiet room). If this is not possible,
investigators should consider arranging to conduct the interview later or elsewhere. A brief account
of the main details should be obtained. This should be recorded and signed by the witness, in a
pocket notebook if an alternative is not available. See also  witness interviews .
Witness statements
Police officers are required to produce a statement from an interview conducted with a witness.
Statements may be taken at the scene immediately following an incident or at a later time or place,
for example, at a police station, the witness’s home or another location.
Investigators must be properly prepared. Any notes that are made must be retained, as the
prosecution may need to disclose any unused material.
The interviewer should ensure that the witness statement accurately reflects what the witness has
said.
The interviewer must also consider the relevant points to prove for the offence in question.
Where the witness is considered to be a significant witness, see  video of witness interview .
Crime report
The interviewer should complete a crime report following the victim interview, in accordance with
local force policy. The crime report is an important document and forms the basis of any further
investigation.
If required, the crime report may be disclosed in evidence to defence lawyers, who will scrutinise it
to ensure that it is accurate and consistent with other evidence.
Crime reports must contain as much information as possible, to provide sufficient detail to assist
any officer who undertakes further investigation of the offence.
Structuring a witness interview
A witness interview should be structured using the  PEACE framework .30/03/2026 Investigative interviewing

It is possible to compare the PEACE model of interviewing with the Framework of Investigative
Interviewing as set out in  MOJ (2022) Achieving Best Evidence in Criminal Proceedings:
Guidance on Interviewing Victims and Witnesses, and using Special Measures . Most phases
are compatible.
Achieving best evidence PEACE
Planning and preparation Planning and preparation 
Establishing rapport Engage and explain
Initiating and supporting a free narrative
account questioningAccount, clarify and challenge
Closing the interview Closure
Evaluation Evaluation
Various question types may be used, but in witness interviews it is considered good practice to
use free recall to encourage the individual to give an account of the situation.
Free recall
This is a system which can be used in interviews to encourage interviewees to put themselves back
into the situation they were in when they witnessed the incident.
A free recall interview includes:
asking the witness to provide an account of the relevant event(s) in their own words (for
example, ‘Earlier today you told me that you saw something last week, please tell me about that in
your own words’)
adopting a posture of active listening, allowing the witness to pause, and using minimal prompts
that do not go beyond the witness’s account
reflecting back what the witness has said, as appropriate
avoiding interrupting30/03/2026 Investigative interviewing

identifying manageable topics or episodes in the witness’s account to be expanded on and
clarified
systematically probing each topic or episode, beginning with open questions using words such as
tell me, explain, describe, before moving on to closed-specific questions (for example, what,
where, when, how and why)
avoiding topic-hopping (rapidly moving from one topic to another and back again)
avoiding multiple questions
using forced-choice and leading questions only if it is essential to do so
systematically probing any information important to the investigation that the witness has not
adequately covered
For example, where an incident took place while the witness was travelling to work, the investigator
may ask them to remember how they felt when they got into their vehicle that morning, what they
saw as they left the house, what the weather was like, and the traffic.
Helping the witness to recall details such as these will enable them to recall more accurately the
conditions that existed at the time of the incident.
The interviewer must undertake a number of tasks simultaneously when conducting free recall
interviews. A structure should, therefore, be in place for effective note-taking.
Note-taking
A structured process for note-taking enables the interviewer to process and respond to the quantity
and quality of information received in the interview.
This provides a firm basis for the questions that need to be asked to clarify or challenge the
interviewee’s account. A tape recording is made, in accordance with PACE, when interviewing
suspects. However, the interviewer still needs to make notes and use them to clarify the suspect’s
account. For further information see  note-taking systems .
Suspect considerations
Working with legal advisers30/03/2026 Investigative interviewing