How to plan for a suspect interview…. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Personal Details 
Ensure you have all the details of the 
suspect including: 
• Name 
• DOB 
• PNC I D 
• Custody Number 
• Solicitor/ Appropriate Adult 
contact details 
 
Disclosure 
 
*Only applicable if detained person has a solicitor* 
*Can be written or verbal* 
 
Disclosure occurs before the intervie w and is the 
opportunity to outline the case to the solicitor so he can 
advise the suspect accordingly. 
 
You need to outline the basic details of the incident 
however you can chose to withhold or disclose certain items 
of evidence if you believe this woul d be beneficial in your 
interview. 
 
Interview Questions 
 
Significant statements - If the defendant has made a 
significant statement upon arrest this should always be put 
to them prior to the interview questions . 
Points to prove - Use a system such as P olice National 
Legal Database (PNLD) to obtain the points to prove for 
the offence. It is essential to cover all of these details in the 
interview so when obtaining a chargi ng decision you can 
outline these points to a sergeant or the Crown Prosecution 
Service . 
Defences - When researching your point s to prove also 
look up accepted defences so you can cover the possibility 
of these being given by the suspect in your interview 
questions. 
Exhibits - Ensure that any items you plan to ask about are 
exhibited. When sh owing the exhibits to the defendant in 
the interview make reference to the exhibit verbally. For 
example “I am now showing Mr Smith Exhibit RS/01 - A 
screenshot of texts sent to Mrs Smith on 2nd February 
2012.” 
CCTV - If using CCTV in an interview it is a go od idea to 
know the exact timings of the footage you want to show to 
the defendant and ensure you have checked that your 
technology works! Similarly with the exhibits, explain on the 
tape the CCTV exhibit you are now showing the suspect. 
 
 
 
 
 Custody 
Always make sure you keep in touch with custody suite and give 
them plenty of warning to arrange for a solicitor/ appropriate adult. 
Disk s- Disks should be unwrapped in front of the defen dant. You 
should have three disk s in total - one master, one working and one 
spare. The master copy should be sealed in front of the suspect. This 
is to ensure if the case goes to court they can see it hasn’t been 
tampered with. You will exhibit these disk s as your own and record 
this in your pocket notebook or statement. 
 
 
 
 
 FIRSTLY CONSIDER… 
Does the suspect want a solicitor? Do they require an appropriate adult? 
Ensure you have this arranged as soon as possible! The c ustody sergeant can 
then contact these people and keep them updated on when you are ready to 
interview. The time left on the custody clock is key! 
 
PEACE approach 
When conducting investigative interviews police forces uses the 
PEACE model as a guideline - 
P- Planning and Preparation 
This is the initi al stage to prepare your questions but also the 
practical elements of the interview such as officers present and tape 
recording equipment. 
E- Engage and Explain . 
Whilst in contact with the suspect you should build a rapport, 
ensure they understand the caut ion and explain the process of the 
interview to them. Research has suggested that there is a positive 
correlation between constructive interpersonal relationships 
between the suspect and police officer and a higher level of 
information given . 
A- Account , Clarification and Challenge 
This is the main part of the interview to gain the suspect’ s 
explanation of what has happened in relation to the offence they are 
being questioned on . This should begin with an open question. 
Following the free recall of the sus pect it is your chance to get a 
greater level of detail and seeking explanation for anything that 
hasn’t made sense. Although you should always try and use open 
questions you may have to be more specific and use closed 
questions to get this level of detail . 
C-Closure 
Before the conclusion of an intervi ew you should recap on what the 
suspect has said and ensure they do not want to change , clarify or 
add anything. 
E- Evaluation 
This phase is used to assess what has been said in accordance with 
the points t o prove and any possible defences they have given but 
also to assess whether you have met you r objectives for the 
interview. 
Post interview 
Write up the notes of your interview on the crime report. Ensure you include start and finish times, your exhibit number and the main 
account given. Note down the questions you have asked especially when the suspect has given a n o comment interview. Also record the 
solicitor and any appropriate adult details . If the case goes to court interview notes will be includ ed in the file.